<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h2>

<p>
It’s not altogether personal..... Until it is
understood and admitted, there is a darkness
everywhere. The life of every man in existence, who
does not understand and admit it, is perfectly senseless.
Until they know they are all living in vain.
</p>
<p>
“What on earth did you mean?” she said as soon
as the omnibus had started.
</p>
<p>
He turned a startled musing face. He had <em>forgotten</em>.
</p>
<p>
“What have I said?”
</p>
<p>
“Kindly think.”
</p>
<p>
“Really I am at a loss.”
</p>
<p>
“When that woman collided with me, crossing
the road.”
</p>
<p>
“Ah, ah, I remember. Well?”
</p>
<p>
“You pronounced an opinion.”
</p>
<p>
“It is not my opinion. It is a matter of ascertained
fact.”
</p>
<p>
“Facts are invented by people who start with
their conclusions arranged beforehand.”
</p>
<p>
“Perhaps so.”
</p>
<p>
“Ah well; that is an admission.”
</p>
<p>
“The conclusion is amply verified.”
</p>
<p>
“Where?”
</p>
<p>
“I speak only of women in the mass. There are
of course exceptions.”
</p>
<p>

“Go on, go on.”
</p>
<p>
“I see you are annoyed. Let us leave this
matter.”
</p>
<p>
“Kindly go on.”
</p>
<p>
“There is nothing more to say.” He <em>laughed</em>.
He was not even being aware that it was a matter
of life and death. He could go on serenely living in
an idea, that turned life into a nightmare.
</p>
<p>
“Oh if it amuses you.” He was silent. The
moments went beating on. She turned from him
and sat averted. She would go now onward and onward
till she could get away over the edge of the
world. There was nothing else to do. There were
no thoughts or words in which her conviction could
take shape. Even looking for them was a degradation.
Besides, argument, if she could steady herself
to face the pain of it, would not, whatever he might
say, even dislodge his satisfied unconcern. He was
uneasy; but only about herself, and would accept
reassurance from her, without a single backward
glance. But what did their personal fate matter beside
a question so all-embracing? What future
could they have in unacknowledged disagreement
over central truth? And if it were acknowledged,
what peace?
</p>
<p>
The long corridor of London imprisoned her.
Far away beneath her tumult it was making its
appeal, renewing the immortal compact. The
irregular façades, dull greys absorbing the light,
bright buffs throwing it brilliantly out, dadoed
below with a patchwork of shops, and overhead the
criss-cross of telephone wires, shut her away from
the low-hung soft grey sky. But far away, unfailing,

retreating as the long corridor telescoped towards
them, an obliterating saffron haze filled the vista,
holding her in her place.
</p>
<p>
The end of the journey brought them to grey
streets and winding alleys where the masts and rigging
that had loomed suddenly in the distance,
robbing the expedition of its promise of ending in
some strange remoteness with their suggestion of
blind busy worlds beyond London, were lost to
sight.
</p>
<p>
“This must be the docks,” she said politely.
</p>
<p>
With the curt permission of a sentinel policeman
they went through a gateway appearing suddenly
before them in a high grey wall. Miriam hurried
forward to meet the open scene for one moment
alone and found herself on a little quay surrounding
a square basin of motionless grey water shut in by
wooden galleries, stacked with mouldering casks.
But the air was the air that moves softly on still days
over wide waters and in the shadowed light of the
enclosure, the fringe of green where the water
touched the grey stone of the quay gleamed brilliantly
in the stillness. She breathed in, in spite of
herself, the charm of the scene; an ordered completeness,
left to itself in beauty; its lonely beauty
to be gathered only by the chance passer-by.
</p>
<p>
“This is a strange romantic place,” said Mr.
Shatov conversationally by her side.
</p>
<p>
“There is nothing,” said Miriam unwillingly,
feeling her theme weaken as she looked away from
it to voice well-known words, “<em>Nothing</em> that reveals
more completely the spiritual,” her voice gave over
the word which broke into meaninglessness upon

the air, “the status of a man as his estimate of
women.”
</p>
<p>
“I entirely agree. I was a feminist in my college
days. I am still a feminist.”
</p>
<p>
Miriam pondered. The word was new to her.
But how could anyone be a feminist and still think
women most certainly inferior beings?
</p>
<p>
“Ah,” she cried “you are one of the Huxleys.”
</p>
<p>
“I don’t follow you.”
</p>
<p>
“Oh well. <em>He</em>, impertinent schoolboy, graciously
suggested that women should be given every possible
kind of advantage, educational and otherwise; saying
almost in the same breath that they could never
reach the highest places in civilisation; that Nature’s
Salic Law would never be repealed.”
</p>
<p>
“Well, how is it to be repealed?”
</p>
<p>
“I don’t know I’m sure. I’m not wise enough to
give instruction in repealing a law that has never
existed. But who is Huxley, that he should take
upon himself to say what are the highest places in
civilisation?”
</p>
<p>
“Miriam” he said, coming round to stand before
her. “We are not going to quarrel over this
matter.” She refused to meet his eyes.
</p>
<p>
“It is not a question of quarrelling, or even discussion.
You have told me all I want to know. I
see exactly where you stand; and for my part it
<em>decides</em>, many things. I don’t say this to amuse myself
or because I want to, but because it is the only
thing I can possibly do.”
</p>
<p>
“Miriam. In this spirit nothing can be said at
all. Let us rather go and have tea.”
</p>
<p>
Poor little man, perhaps he was weary; troubled

in this strange grey corner of a country not his own,
isolated with an unexpected anger. They had tea
in a small dark room behind a little shop. It was
close packed with an odorous dampness. Miriam sat
frozen, appalled by the presence of a negro. He sat
near by, huge, bent snorting and devouring, with a
huge black bottle at his side. Mr. Shatov’s presence
was shorn of its alien quality. He was an Englishman
in the fact that he and she could <em>not</em> sit eating
in the neighbourhood of this marshy jungle. But
they were, they had. They would have. Once away
from this awful place she would never think of it
again. Yet the man had hands and needs and feelings.
Perhaps he could sing. He was at a disadvantage,
an outcast. There was something that ought
to be said to him. She could not think what it was.
In his oppressive presence it was impossible to think
at all. Every time she sipped her bitter tea it
seemed that before she should have replaced her cup,
vengeance would have sprung from the dark corner.
Everything hurried so. There was no <em>time</em> to shake
off the sense of contamination. It <em>was</em> contamination.
The man’s presence was an outrage on something
of which he was not aware. It would be
possible to make him aware. When his fearful face,
which she sadly knew she could not bring herself to
regard a second time, was out of sight, the outline
of his head was desolate, like the contemplated head
of any man alive. Men ought not to have faces.
Their real selves abode in the expressions of their
heads and brows. Below, their faces were moulded
by deceit......
</p>
<p>
While she had pursued her thoughts, advantage

had fallen to the black form in the corner. It was
as if the black face grinned, crushing her thread of
thought.
</p>
<p>
“You see, Miriam, if instead of beating me, you
will tell me your <em>thoughts</em>, it is quite possible that
mine may be modified. There is at least nothing of
the bigot in me.”
</p>
<p>
“It is not what people may be made to see for a
few minutes in conversations that counts. It is the
conclusions they come to, instinctively, by themselves.”
He wanted to try and think as she did
...... “chose attendrissante; il me ressemblaient”
..... <em>life</em> .. <em>was</em> different, to everybody,
even to intellectual male vain-boasters, from everybody’s
descriptions; there was nothing to point to
anywhere that exactly corresponded to spoken
opinions. But the relieving truth of this was only
realised privately. The things went on being said.
Men did not admit their private discoveries in
public. It was not enough to see and force the
admittance of the holes in a theory privately, and
leave the form of words going on and on in the
world perpetually parroted, infecting the sky.
“Wise women know better and go their way without
listening,” is not enough. It is not only the
insult to women; a contempt for men is a bulwark
against that, but introduces sourness into one’s own
life....... It is the impossibility of witnessing
the pouring on of a vast, repeating public life that
is missing the significance of everything.
</p>
<p>
Yet what a support, she thought with a sideways
glance, was his own gentleness ... gentilesse ...
and humanity, to his own theory. He was serene

and open in the presence of this central bitterness.
If she could summon, in words, convincing evidence
of the inferiority of man, he would cheerfully accept
it and go on unmaimed. But a private reconstruction
of standards in agreement with one person
would not bring healing. It was history, literature,
the way of stating records, reports, stories, the whole
method of statement of things from the beginning
that was on a false foundation.
</p>
<p>
If only one could speak as quickly as one’s thoughts
flashed, and several thoughts together, all with a
separate life of their own and yet belonging, everybody
would be understood. As it was, even in the
most favourable circumstances, people could hardly
communicate with each other at all.
</p>
<p>
“I have nothing to say. It is not a thing that
can be argued out. Those women’s rights people are
the worst of all. Because they think women have
been “subject” in the past. Women never have
been subject. Never can be. The proof of this is
the way men have always been puzzled and everlastingly
trying fresh theories; founded <em>on</em> the very
small experience of women any man is capable of
having. Disabilities, imposed by law, are a stupid
insult to women, but have never touched them as
individuals. In the long run they injure only men.
For they keep back the civilisation of the outside
world, which is the only thing men can make. It
is not everything. It is a sort of result, poor and
shaky because the real inside civilisation of women,
the one thing that has been in them from the first
and is not in the natural man, not made by “things,”
is kept out of it. Women do not need civilisation.

It is apt to bore them. <em>But</em> it can never rise above
their level. They keep it back. That does not
matter, to themselves. But it matters to men. And
if they want their old civilisation to be anything but
a dreary-weary puzzle, they must leave off imagining
themselves a race of gods fighting against chaos, and
thinking of women as part of the chaos they have to
civilise. There isn’t any “chaos.” Never has been.
It’s the principal masculine illusion. It is not a truth
to say that women must be civilised. Feminists are
not only an insult to womanhood. They are a libel
on the universe.” In the awful presence she had
spoken herself out, found and recited her best most
liberating words. The little unseen room shone, its
shining speaking up to her from small things immediately
under her eyes. Light, pouring from her
speech, sent a radiance about the thick black head
and its monstrous bronze face. He might have his
thoughts, might even look them, from the utmost
abyss of crude male life, but he had helped her, and
his blind unconscious outlines shared the unknown
glory. But she doubted if she would remember that
thoughts flowed more easily, with surprising ease, as
if given, waiting, ready to be scanned and stated,
when one’s eyes ceased to look outwards. If she
could remember it, it might prove to be the solution
of social life.
</p>
<p>
“These things are all matters of opinion. Whereas
it is a matter of indisputable <em>fact</em> that in the past
women have been subject.”
</p>
<p>
“If you believe that it is impossible for us to
associate. Because we are living in two utterly
different worlds.”
</p>
<p>

“On the contrary. This difference is a most excellent
basis for association.”
</p>
<p>
“You think I can cheerfully regard myself as an
emancipated slave, with traditions of slavery for
memory and the form of a slave as an everlasting
heritage?”
</p>
<p>
“Remember that heredity is cross-wise. You are
probably more the daughter of your father ...”
</p>
<p>
“<em>That</em> won’t help you, thank you. If anything
I am my mother’s son.”
</p>
<p>
“Ah—ah, what is this, you are a <em>son</em>. Do you
see?”
</p>
<p>
“That’s a piece of English feudalism.”
</p>
<p>
“The demands of feudalism do not explain a
woman’s desire for sons.”
</p>
<p>
“That is another question. She hopes <em>they</em> will
give her the understanding she never had from their
father. In that I <em>am</em> my mother’s son for ever. If
there’s a future life, all I care for is to meet <em>her</em>. If
I could have her back for ten minutes I would gladly
give up the rest of my life..... Is heredity really
criss-cross? Is it proved?”
</p>
<p>
“Substantially.”
</p>
<p>
“Oh yes. Of course. I know. To prevent civilisation
going ahead too fast! I’ve seen that somewhere.
Very flattering to men. But it proves
there’s no separate race of men and women.”
</p>
<p>
“Exactly.”
</p>
<p>
“Then how have men the face to go on with their
generalisations about women?”
</p>
<p>
“You yourself have a generalisation about
women.”
</p>
<p>
“That’s different. It’s not about brains and

attainments. I can’t make you see. I suppose it’s
Christianity.”
</p>
<p>
“What is Christianity? You think Christianity
is favourable to women? On the contrary. It is
the Christian countries that have produced the prostitute
and the most vile estimations of women in
the world. It is only in Christian countries that I
find the detestable spectacle of men who will go
straight from association with loose women into the
society of innocent girls. That I find unthinkable......
With Jews womanhood has always been
sacred. And there can be no doubt that we owe
our persistence as a race largely to our laws of protection
for women; <em>all</em> women. Moreover in the
older Hebrew civilisation women stood very high.
You may read this. To-day there is a very significant
Jewish wit which says that women make the
best wives and mothers in the world.”
</p>
<p>
“There you are. No Englishman would make a
joke like that.”
</p>
<p>
“Because he is a hypocrite.”
</p>
<p>
“No. He may, as you say, think one thing and
say another; but long long ago he had a jog. It
<em>was</em> Christianity. Something happened. Christ was
the first man to see women as individuals.”
</p>
<p>
“You speak easily of Christianity. There is no
Christianity in the world. It has never been imagined,
save in the brain of a Tolstoy. And he has
shown that if the principles of Christianity were
applied, civilisation as we know it would at once
come to an end.”
</p>
<p>
“There may not be much Christianity. But
Christianity has made a difference. It has not given

things to women that were not there before.
Nothing can do that. But it has shed a light on
them <em>which</em> the best women run away from. Never
imagine I am speaking of myself. I’m as much a
man as a woman. That’s why I can’t help seeing
things. But I’m not really interested. Not inside
myself. Now look here. You prefer Englishwomen
to Jewesses. I can’t bear Jewesses, not
because they are not really like other women, but
because they reflect the limitations of the Jewish
male. They talk and think the Jewish man’s idea of
them. It has nothing to do with them as individuals.
But they are waiting for the light to go up.”
</p>
<p>
“I speak always of these assimilated and half-assimilated
English Jewesses. Certainly to me they
are most inimical.”
</p>
<p>
“More so than the Germans?”
</p>
<p>
“In a different way. They have here less social
disabilities. But they are most absolutely terre-à-terre.”
</p>
<p>
“Why are Russian Jewesses different?”
</p>
<p>
“Many of them are idealist. Many live altogether
by one or two ideas of Tolstoy.”
</p>
<p>
“Why do you smile condescendingly?”
</p>
<p>
“These ideas can lead only to revolution. I am
not a revolutionary. While I admire everywhere
those who suffer for their ideals.”
</p>
<p>
“You admit that Tolstoy has influenced Russian
Jewesses. <em>He</em> got his ideas from Christ. So you
say. I did not know he was religious.”
</p>
<p>
“It is a later development. But you remember
Levin. But tell me, do you not consider that wife
and mother is the highest position of woman?”
</p>
<p>

“It is neither high nor low. It may be anything.
If you define life for women, as husbands and children,
it means that you have no consciousness at all
where women are concerned.”
</p>
<p>
“There is the evidence of women themselves.
The majority find their whole life in these things.”
</p>
<p>
“That is a description, from outside, by men.
When women use it they do not know what they
say.”
</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
