<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">III</h2>
			<p>Three months ago the Christmas had been a goal for which she could hardly wait. It had offered her, this time, more than its usual safe deep firelit seclusion beyond which no future was visible. It was to pay her in full for having missed the beginning of Eve’s venture, taking her down into the midst of it when everything was in order and the beginnings still near enough to be remembered. But having remained during the engrossing months, forgotten, at the same far-distant point, Christmas now suddenly reared itself up a few days off, offering nothing but the shadow of an unavoidable interruption. For the first time she could see life going on beyond it. She would go down into its irrelevance, taking part in everything with absentminded animation, looking towards her return to town. It would not be Christmas, and the long days of forced absence threatened the features of the year that rose, far away and uncertain, beyond the obstruction.</p>
			<p>But the afternoon she came home with four days holiday in her hand, past and future were swept from her path. Tomorrow’s journey was a far-off appointment, her London friends remote shadows, banished from the endless continuance of life. She wandered about between Wimpole Street and <abbr>St.</abbr> Pancras, holding in imagination wordless converse with a stranger whose whole experience had melted and vanished like her own, into the flow of light down the streets; into the unending joy of the way the angles of buildings cut themselves out against the sky, glorious if she paused to survey them; and almost unendurably wonderful, keeping her hurrying on pressing, through insufficient silent outcries, towards something, anything, even instant death, if only they could be expressed when they moved with her movement, a maze of shapes, flowing, tilting into each other, in endless patterns, sharp against the light; sharing her joy in the changing same same song of the London traffic; the bliss of post-offices and railway stations, cabs going on and on towards unknown space; omnibuses rumbling securely from point to point, always within the magic circle of London.</p>
			<p>Her meal was a crowded dinner-party, all the people in the restaurant its guests, plunging with her, released from experience, unhaunted by hope or regret, into the endless beginning. Into the wrapped contemplation of the gathering, the thought of her visit flashed like a star, dropping towards her, and when she was gathering things together for her packing, her eagerness flamed up and lit her room.</p>
			<p>… The many Christmasses with the Brooms had been part of her long run of escape from the pain-shadowed family life; their house at first a dream-house in the unbroken dream of her own life in London, a shelter where agony was unknown, and lately a forgetfulness, for the long days of the holiday, of the challenge that lived in the walls of her room. For so long the walls had ceased to be the thrilled companions of her freedom, they had seen her endless evening hours of waiting for the next day to entangle her in its odious revolution. They had watched her in bleak daylight listening to life going on obliviously all round her, and scornfully sped her desperate excursions into other lives, greeting her empty glad return with the reminder that relief would fade, leaving her alone again with their unanswered challenge. They knew the recurring picture of a form, drifting, grey face upwards, under a featureless grey sky, in shallows, “unreached by the human tide” and had seen its realisation in her vain prayer that life should not pass her by; mocking the echoes of her cry, and waiting indifferent, serene with the years they knew before she came, for those that would follow her meaningless impermanence. When she lost the sense of herself in moments of gladness, or in the long intervals of thought that encircled her intermittent reading, they were all round her, waiting, ready to remind her, undeceived by her daily busy passing in and out, relentlessly counting its secret accumulating shame.</p>
			<p>During the last three months they had not troubled her. They had become transparent, while the influence of her summer still had them at bay, to the glow shed up from the hours she had spent downstairs with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey, and before there was time for them to close round her once more, the figure of Michael Shatov, with Europe stretching wide behind him, had forced them into companionship with all the walls in the world. She had been conscious that they waited for his departure; but it was far away out of sight, and when she should be once more alone with them, their attack would find her surrounded; lives lived alone within the vanquished walls of single poor bare rooms in every town in Europe would come visibly to her aid, driving her own walls back into dependence.</p>
			<p>But tonight they were radiant. On no walls in the world could there be a brighter light. Streaming from their gaslit spaces, wherever she turned, was the wide brilliance that had been on everything in the days standing behind the shadow that had driven her into their enclosure. Eve and Harriett, waiting for her together, in a new sunlit life, were the full answer to their challenge. She was going <em>home</em>. The walls were traveller’s walls. That had been their first fascination; but they had known her only as a traveller; now as she dipped into the unbroken life that would flow round her with the sound of her sisters’ blended voices, they knew whence she came and what had been left behind. They saw her years of travel contract to a few easily afforded moments, lit though she had not known it, by light instreaming from the past and flowing now visibly ahead across the farther years.</p>
			<p>The distant forgotten forms of the friends of her London life, turning away slighted, filled her, watching them, with a half-repenting solicitude. But they had their mysterious secret life, incomprehensible, but their own; they turned away towards each other and their own affairs, all of them set, at varying angles, unquestioningly towards a prospect she did not wish to share.</p>
			<p>She went eagerly to sleep and woke in a few moments in a morning whose sounds coming through the open window, called to her as she leapt out towards them, for responsive demonstrations. Her desire to shout, thrilled to her feet, winged them.</p>
			<p>Sitting decorously at the breakfast-table, she felt in equal relationship to all the bright assembly, holding off <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Shatov’s efforts to engage her in direct conversation, that she might hear, thoughtless and uncomprehending, the general sound of interwoven bright inflections echoing quietly out into the vast morning. She ran out into it, sending off her needless telegram for the joy of skimming over the well-known flags with endless time to spare. The echoing London sky poured down upon them the light of all the world. Within it her share gleamed dancing, given to her by the London years, the London life, shining now, far away, in multitudinous detail, the contemplated enviable life of a stranger.</p>
			<p>The third-class carriage was stuffy and cold, crowded with excited travellers whose separate eyes strove in vain to reach the heart of the occasion through a ceaseless exclamatory interchange about what lay just behind them and ahead at the end of the journey.⁠ ⁠… At some time, for some moments during the ensuing days, each one of them would be alone.⁠ ⁠… Consulting the many pairs of eyes, so different yet so strangely alike in their method of contemplation, so hindered and distracted, she felt, with a stifling pang of conviction, that their days would pass and bring no solitude, no single touch of realisation, and leave them going on, with eyes still quenched and glazed, striving outwards, now here now there, to reach some unapprehended goal.</p>
			<p>Immersing herself in her corner she saw nothing more until Eve’s face appeared in the crowd waiting upon the seaside platform. Eve beamed welcome and eager wordless communications and turned at once to lead the way through the throng. They hurried, separated by Miriam’s hand-luggage, silenced by the din of the traffic rattling over the cobblestones, meeting and parting amongst the thronging pedestrians, down the steep slope of the narrow street until Eve turned, with a piloting backward glance, and led the way along the cobbled pavement of a side-street, still narrower and sloping even more steeply downhill. It was deserted, and as they went single-file along the narrow pavement, Miriam caught in the distance, the unwonted sound of the winter sea. She had not thought of the sea as part of her visit, and lost herself in the faint familiar roll and flump of the south-coast tide. It was enough. The holiday came and passed in the imagined sight of the waves tumbling in over the grey beach, and the breaking of the brilliant seaside light upon the varying house-fronts behind the promenade; she returned restored; the prize of far-off London renewed already, keenly, within her hands, to find Eve standing still just ahead, turned towards her; smiling too breathlessly for speech. They were in front of a tiny shopfront, slanting with the steep slant of the little road. The window was full of things set close to the panes on narrow shelves. Miriam stood back, pouring out her appreciation. It <em>was</em> perfect; just as she had imagined it; exactly the little shop she had dreamed of keeping when she was a child. She felt a pang of envy.</p>
			<p>“<em>Mine</em>” said Eve blissfully “my own.” Eve had property; fragile delicate <em>Eve</em>, the problem of the family. This was her triumph. Miriam hurried, lest her thoughts should become visible, to glance up and down the street and exclaim the perfection of the situation.</p>
			<p>“I know,” said Eve with dreamy tenderness, “and it’s all my own; the shop and the house; all mine.” Miriam’s eyes rose fearfully. Above the shop, a narrow strip of bright white plaster house shot up, two storeys high; charming, in the way it was complete, a house, and yet the whole of it, with a strip of sky above, and the small neat pavement below, in your eye at once, and beside it right and left, the irregular heights and widths of the small houses, close-built and flush with the edge of the little pavement, up and down the hill. But the thought of the number of rooms inside the little building brought, together with her longing to see them, a sense of the burden of possessions, and her envy disappeared. While she cried you’ve got a <em>house</em>, she wondered, scanning Eve’s radiant slender form, whence she drew with all her apparent helplessness, the strength to face such formidable things.</p>
			<p>“I’ve let the two rooms over the shop. I live at the top.” As she exclaimed on the implied wealth, Miriam found her envy wandering back in the thought of the two rooms under the sky, well away from the shop in another world, the rest of the house securely cared for by other people. She moved to the window. “All the right things,” she murmured, from her shocked survey of the rows of light green bottles filled with sweets, the boxes of soap, cigarettes, clay pipes, bootlaces, jewellery pinned to cards, crackers and tightly packed pink and white muslin Christmas stockings. Between the shelves she saw the crowded interior of the little shop, a strip of counter, a man with rolled up shirt sleeves, busily twisting a small screw of paper.⁠ ⁠… <em>Gerald</em>.</p>
			<p>“Come inside,” said Eve from the door.</p>
			<p>“Hullo, Mirry, what d’you think of the emporium?” Gerald, his old easy manner, his smooth polished gentle voice, his neat, iron handshake across the mean little counter, gave Eve’s enterprise the approval of all the world. “I’ve done up enough screws of tea to last you the whole blessed evening,” he went on from the midst of Miriam’s exclamations “and at least twenty people have been in since you left.” A little door flew open in the wall just behind him and Harriett, in an overall, stood at the top of a short flight of stairs, leaping up and down in the doorway. Miriam ran round behind the counter, freely, Eve’s shop, their shop, behind her. “Hulloh old silly,” beamed Harriett kissing and shaking her “I just rushed down, can’t stay a minute, I’m in the middle of nine dinners, they’re all leaving tomorrow and you’re to come and sleep with <em>us</em>.” She fled down the steps, out through the shop and away up the hill, with a rousing attack on Gerald as she passed him leaning with Eve over the till. Miriam was welcomed. The fact of her visit was more to Harriett than her lodgers. She collected her belongings and carried them up the steps past a small dark flight of stairs into a dark little room. A small fire was burning in a tiny kitchen range; a candle guttered on the mantelpiece in the draught from the shop; there was no window and the air of the room was close with the combined odours of the things crowded into the small space. She went back into the bright familiar shop. Gerald was leaving; see you tomorrow he called from the door with his smile.</p>
			<p>“<em>Now</em>; I’ll light the lamp and we’ll be cosy,” said Eve leading the way back into the little room. Miriam waited impatiently for the lamp to make a live centre in the crowded gloom. The little black kitchen fire was intolerable as president of Eve’s leisure. But the dim lamp, standing low on a little table, made the room gloomier and Eve was back in the shop with a customer. Only the dingy little table, a battered tray bearing the remains of a hasty, shabby tea, the fall below it of a faded ugly fringed tablecloth and a patch of threadbare carpet, were clearly visible.⁠ ⁠… She could not remove her attention from them.</p>
			<p>Lying sleepless by Eve’s side late that night, she watched the pictures that crowded the darkness. Her first moments in the little back room were far away. The small dark bedroom was full of the last picture of Eve, in her nightgown, quietly relentless after explaining that she always kept the window shut because plenty of air came in, taking a heavy string of large blue beads out of her top drawer, to put them in readiness with tomorrow’s dress. No; I don’t think that a bit; and if I <em>were</em> a savage, I should hang myself all over with beads and <em>love</em> it. She had spoken with such <em>conviction</em>⁠ ⁠… Up here, with her things arranged round her as she had had them at home and in her bedroom at the Greens’, she kept her life as it had always been. She was still her unchanged self, but her freedom was giving her the strength to be sure of her opinions. It was as if she had been saying all the evening with long accumulating preparedness, holding her poise throughout the interruptions of customers and down into the details of the story of her adventures, <em>Yes</em> I know your opinions, I have heard them all my life, and now I’m out in the world myself and can meet everybody as an equal, and say what I think, without wondering whether it suits my part as the Greens’ governess. She had got her strength from the things she had done. It was amazing to think of her summoning courage to break again with the Greens and borrowing from them to start in business, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Green “setting his heart” on the success of the little shop and meaning to come down and see how it was getting on. How awful it would be if it did not get on.⁠ ⁠… But it was getting on.⁠ ⁠… How terrifying it must have been at first not knowing the price of anything in the shop or what to buy for it⁠ ⁠… and then, customers telling her the prices of things and where they were kept, and travellers being <em>kind</em>; respectful and friendly and ready to go out of their way to do <em>anything</em>⁠ ⁠… that was the other side of Maupassant’s “<i xml:lang="fr">hourrah pour la petite difference</i>” <i xml:lang="fr">commis voyageurs</i>⁠ ⁠… and well-to-do people in the neighbourhood rushing in for some little thing, taken aback to find a lady behind the counter, and coming again for all sorts of things.⁠ ⁠… Eve would become like one of those middle-aged women shopkeepers in books, in the country, with a kind heart and a sarcastic tongue, seeing through everybody and having the same manner for the vicar and a ploughman, or a rather nicer manner for a ploughman. <em>No.</em> Eve was still sentimental.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Those wonderful letters were a bridge; a promise for the future.⁠ ⁠… They were the letters of a boy; <em>that</em> was the struggling impression she had not been able to convey. She could start the day well by telling Eve that in the morning. They were the letters of a youth in love for the first time in his life⁠ ⁠… and he had <em>fifteen</em> grandchildren. “So wonderful when you think of that old, old man” had not expressed it at all. They were wonderful for <em>anybody</em>. Page after page, all breathing out the way things shine when the sense of someone who is not there, is there all the time. Eve knew what it had meant to him; “age makes no difference.” Then might life suddenly shine like that at any moment, right up to the end.⁠ ⁠… And it made Eve so wonderful; having no idea, all those years, and thinking him just a very kind old man to come, driving, almost from his deathbed, with a little rose-tree in the carriage for her. It was so perfect that he wrote only after she had gone, and he knew he was dying; a youth in love for the first time. If there were a future life he would be watching, for Eve to walk gently in crowned with song and making everything sing all round her.⁠ ⁠… But what of the wife, and of Eve’s future husband? In Heaven there is neither marrying nor giving in marriage⁠ ⁠… but Kingsley said, then that has nothing to do with me and my wife. Perhaps that was an example of the things he suddenly thought of, walking quickly up and down the garden with a friend, and introduced by saying “I have <em>always</em> thought.”⁠ ⁠… But perhaps the things that occur to you suddenly for the first time in conversation <em>are</em> the things you have always thought, without knowing it⁠ ⁠… that was one of the good things in talking to Michael Shatov, finding out thoughts, looking at them when they were expressed and deciding to change them, or think them more decidedly than ever⁠ ⁠… she could explain all that to Eve in the morning as an introduction to him. Or perhaps she could again say, having Eve’s attention free of the shop, “I have two pounds to spend on chocolate. Isn’t it extraordinary. I must, I am on my honour,” and then go on. It was <em>horrible</em> that Eve had hardly noticed such a startling remark.⁠ ⁠… She turned impatiently; the morning would never come; she would never sleep in this stagnant shut-in motionless air. Tomorrow night she would be in a room by herself at Harry’s; but not quite so near to the sea. How <em>could</em> Eve shut out life and the sound of the sea? She puffed her annoyance, hardly caring if Eve were disturbed, ready to ask her if she could not smell the smell of the house and the shop and the little back room. But that was not true. She was imagining it because the motionless air was getting on her nerves. If she could not forget it she would have no sleep until she dozed with exhaustion in the morning. And tomorrow was Christmas Day. She lay still, straining her ears to catch the sound of the sea.</p>
			<p>The next night the air poured in at an open window, silently lifting long light muslin curtains and waving them about the little narrow room filled as with moonlight by the soft blue light from the streetlamp below. The sound of the sea drowned the present in the sense of seaside summers; bringing back moments of chance wakenings on seaside holidays, when the high blaze of yesterday and tomorrow were together in the darkness. Miriam slept at once and woke refreshed and careless in the frosty sunrise. Her room was blazing with golden light. She lay motionless, contemplating it. There was no sound in the house. She could watch the sunlight till something happened. Harry would see that she got up in time for breakfast. There would be sunlight at breakfast in the room below; and Harry and Gerald and the remains of Christmas leisure.⁠ ⁠… “We only keep going because of Elspeth.” How could she have gone off to sleep last night without recalling that? If Harry and Gerald found marriage a failure, it was a failure. Perhaps it was a passing phase and they would think differently later on. But they had spoken so simply, as if it were a commonplace fact known to everybody⁠ ⁠… they had met so many people by this time. Nearly all their lodgers had been married, and unhappy. Perhaps that was because they were nearly all theatrical people? If Harry had stayed in London and not had to work for a living would she have been happier? No; she was gayer down here; even more herself. It <em>amused</em> her to have rushes, and turn out three rooms after ten o’clock at night. They both seemed to run the house as a sort of joke, and remained absolutely themselves. Perhaps that was just in talking about it, at Christmas, to her. It certainly must be horrible in the season, as Harry said, the best part of the house packed with selfish strangers for the very best part of the year; so much to do for them all day that there was never even time to run down to the sea.⁠ ⁠… Visitors did not think of that. If they considered their landlady it would spoil their one fortnight of being free. Landladies ought to be old; not minding about working all day for other people and never seeing the sea. Harry was too young to be a landlady⁠ ⁠… the gently moving curtains were flat against the window again for a moment, a veil of thin muslin screening the brilliant gold, making it an even tone all over the room; a little oblong of misty golden light. Even for Harry’s sake she could not let any tinge of sadness invade it.⁠ ⁠… That was being exactly like the summer visitors.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“Good <em>Gracious</em>!” The door was open and Harry, entering with a jug of hot water was enveloped in the end of the out-blown curtains. “Why on Earth d’you have your window like that? It’s simply <em>bitter</em>.”</p>
			<p>“I love it,” said Miriam, watching Harriett’s active little moving form battle with the flying draperies. “I’m revelling in it.”</p>
			<p>“Well I won’t presume to shut it; but revel <em>up</em>. Here you are. Breakfast’s nearly ready. Hold the ends while I get out and shut the door.”</p>
			<p>Harry <em>too</em>; and she used to be so fond of open windows. But it was not a snub. She would say to Gerald she’s got her window bang open, isn’t she an old <em>Cure</em>? She got out singing into the fresh golden air leaving the window wide. The London temptation to shirk her swift shampoo and huddle on a garment did not come. The sense of summer was so strong in the bright air that she felt sure, if only she could have always bright screened light in her room, summer warmth and summer happiness would last the whole year round.</p>
			<p>Gerald was pouring out coffee. In the kitchen the voices of Harriett and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Thimm were railing cheerfully together. Harriett came in with a rush, slamming the door. “Is it too warm for you in here Miss Henderson?” she asked as she drove Gerald to his own end of the table.</p>
			<p>“It’s glorious,” said Miriam subsiding into indefinite anticipation. The room was very warm with sunlight and a blazing fire. But there was no pressure anywhere. It was their youth and the way being with them made things go backwards as far as one could see and confidently forward from any room they happened to be in. A meal with them always seemed as if it might go on forever. She glanced affectionately from one to the other, longing to convey to them in some form of words the thing they did not seem to know, the effect they made, together, through having been together from such early beginnings, how it gave and must always give a <em>confidence</em> to the very expression of their hair, making them always about to start life together. It came from Harriett, and was reflected by Gerald, a light that played about him, decking him in his most unconscious, busy, man’s moments with the credit of having found Harriett. They seemed more suitably arranged, confronted here together in this bright eventful house, meeting adventures together, mutually efficient towards a common end, than with Gerald in business and Harry silken and leisurely in a suburban house.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“We’ll be more glorious in a minute,” said Gerald sweeping actively about. “I’ll just move that old fern.”</p>
			<p>“Oh of <em>course</em>” mocked Harriett, “<em>look</em> at the importance⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Whistling softly Gerald placed a small square box on the table amongst the breakfast things.</p>
			<p>“<em>Oh</em> dear me,” moaned Harriett from behind the coffee pot, smirking coyly backwards over her shoulder, “hoh, <em>ar’n’t</em> we grand.” “It’s the new <em>toy</em>” she rapped avertedly towards Miriam, in a despairing whisper. Gerald interrupted his whistling to fix on to the box a sort of trumpet, a thing that looked like a wide-open green nasturtium.</p>
			<p>“Is it a musical box?” asked Miriam.</p>
			<p>“D’you mean to say you’ve never seen a gramophone yet?” murmured Gerald, frowning and flicking away dust with his handkerchief. They did not mean as much as they appeared to do when they said life was not worth living⁠ ⁠… they had not discovered life. Gerald did not know the meaning of his interest in things. “People grieve and bemoan themselves, but it is not half so bad with them as they say.”⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“I haven’t. I’ve heard them squeaking inside public houses of course.”</p>
			<p>“Now’s your chance then. Woa Jemima! That’s the ticket. <em>Now</em> she’s off⁠—”</p>
			<p>Miriam waited, breathless; eagerly prepared to accept the coming wonder. A sound like the crackling of burning twigs came out into the silence. She remembered her first attempt to use a telephone, the need for concentrating calmly through the preliminary tumult, on the certainty that intelligible sounds would presently emerge, and listened encouragingly for a voice. The crackling changed to a metallic scraping, labouring steadily round and round, as if it would go on forever; it ceased and an angry stentorian voice seemed to be struggling, half-smothered, in the neck of the trumpet. Miriam gazed, startled, at the yawning orifice, as the voice suddenly escaped and leapt out across the table with a “Edison-<strong>Bell</strong> <strong>Rec</strong>ord!” Lightly struck chords tinkled far away, fairy music, sounding clear and distinct on empty space remote from the steady scraping of the machine. Then a song began. The whole machine seemed to sing it; vibrating with effort, sending forth the notes in a jerky staccato, the scarcely touched words clipped and broken to fit the jingling tune; the sustained upper notes at the end of the verse wavered chromatically, as if the machine were using its last efforts to reach the true pitch; it ceased and the far away chords came again, fainter and further away. In the second verse the machine struggled more feebly and slackened its speed, flattened suddenly to a lower key, wavered on, flattening from key to key and collapsed, choking, on a single downward-slurring squeak⁠—</p>
			<p>“Oh, but that’s absolutely <em>perfect</em>” gasped Miriam.</p>
			<p>“You want to set it <em>slower</em> silly; it all began too <em>high</em>.”</p>
			<p>“<em>I</em> know, la reine, <em>he</em> knows, he’ll set it slower all right.”</p>
			<p>This time the voice marched lugubriously forth, with a threatening emphasis on each word; the sustained notes blared wide through their mufflings; yawned out by an angry lion.</p>
			<p>“My <em>word</em>,” said Harriett “it’s a funeral this time.”</p>
			<p>“But it’s <em>glorious</em>! Can you make it go as slowly as you like?”</p>
			<p>“We’ll get it right presently, never fear.”</p>
			<p>Miriam felt that no correct performance could be better than what she had heard, and listened carelessly to the beginning of the third performance. If it succeeded the blissful light flowing from the room out over her distant world must either be shattered by her tacit repudiation of the cheaply devised ditty, or treacherously preserved at the price of simulated satisfaction. The prelude sounded nearer this time, revealing a piano and an accompanist, and the song came steadily out, a pleasant kindly baritone, beating along on a middle key; a nice unimaginative brown-haired young man, who happened to have a voice. She ceased to attend; the bright breakfast-table, the cheerfully decorated square room bathed in the brilliant morning light that was flooding the upward slope of the town from the wide sky towering above the open sea, was suddenly outside space and time, going on forever untouched; the early days flowed up, recovered completely from the passage of time, going forward with today added to them, forever. The march of the refrain came lilting across the stream of days, joyfully beating out the common recognition of the three listeners. She restrained her desire to take it up, flinging out her will to hold back the others, that they might face out the moment and let it make its full mark. In the next refrain they could all take the relief of shouting their acknowledgement, a hymn to the threefold life. The last verse was coming successfully through; in an instant the chorus refrain would be there. It was old and familiar, woven securely into experience, beginning its life as memory. She listened eagerly. It was partly too, she thought, absence of singer and audience that redeemed both the music and the words. It was a song overheard; sounding out innocently across the morning. She saw the sun shining on the distant hilltops, the comrades in line, and the lingering lover tearing himself away for the roll-call. The refrain found her far away, watching the scene until the last note should banish it.</p>
			<p>The door opened and Elspeth stood in the doorway.</p>
			<p>“<em>Well</em> my pet?” said Harriett and Gerald gently, together.</p>
			<p>She trotted round the open door, carefully closing it with her body, her steady eyes taking in the disposition of affairs. In a moment she stood near the table, the silky rounded golden crown of her head rising just above it. Miriam thrilled at her nearness, delighting in the firm clutch of the tiny hand on the edge of the table, the gentle shapely bulge of the ends of her hair inturned towards her neck, the little busy bustling expression of her bunchy motionless little muslin dress. Suddenly she looked up in her way, Gerald’s disarming gentleness, all Eve’s reined-in gaiety⁠ ⁠… “I your baby?” she asked with a small lunge of affection. Miriam blushed. The tiny thing had <em>remembered</em> from yesterday.⁠ ⁠… Yes, she murmured encircling her and pressing her lips to the warm silken top of her head. Gerald burst into loud wailing. Elspeth moved backwards towards Harriett and stood propped against her, contemplating him with sunny interest. Harriett’s firm ringed hand covered the side of her head.</p>
			<p>“Poor Poppa,” she suggested.</p>
			<p>“Be <em>cri</em>-ut Gerald!” Elspeth cried serenely, frowning with effort. She stood on tiptoe surveying the contents of the table and waved a peremptory hand towards the gramophone. Gerald tried to make a bargain. Lifted on to Harriett’s knee she bunched her hands and sat compact. The direct rays made her head a little sunlit sphere, smoothly outlined with silky pale gold hair bulging softly over each ear, the broken curve continued by the gentle bulge of her cheeks as she pursed her face to meet the sunlight. She peered unsmiling, but every curve smiled; a little sunny face, sunlit. Fearing that she would move, Miriam tried to centre attention by seeming engrossed in Gerald’s operations, glancing sideways meanwhile in an entrancement of effort to define her small perfection. The list of single items summoned images of children who missed her charm by some accentuation of character, pointing backwards to the emphatic qualities of a relative and forward so clearly that already they seemed adult. Elspeth predicted nothing. The closest observation revealed no point of arrest. Her undivided impression once caught, could be recovered in each separate feature.</p>
			<p>Eve came in as the music ceased. In the lull that followed the general greetings Miriam imagined a repetition of the song, to carry Eve back into what had gone before and forward with them in the unchanged morning. But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Thimm broke in with a tray and scattered them all towards the fire. Let’s hear Molly Darling once more she thought in a casual tone. After yesterday Eve would take that as a lack of interest in her presence. Supposing she did? She was so changed that she could be treated without consideration, as an equal⁠ ⁠… but she overdid it, preening herself, caring more for the idea of independence than for the fact. That would not keep her going. She would not be strong enough to sustain her independence.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>The sense of triumph threw up an effulgence even while Miriam accused herself of cruelty in contemplating the droopy exhaustion which had outlived Eve’s day of rest. But she was not alone in this; nice good people were secretly impatient with relatives who were always threatening to break down and become problems. And Eve had almost ceased to be a relative. Descending to the rank of competitor she was no longer a superior⁠ ⁠… she was an inferior masquerading as an equal⁠ ⁠… that was what men meant in the newspapers. Then it couldn’t be true. There was some other explanation. It was because she was using her independence as a revenge for the past.⁠ ⁠… What men resented was the sudden reflection of their detachment by women who had for themselves discovered its secret, and knew what uncertainties went on behind it. She was resenting Eve’s independence as a man would do. Eve was saying she now understood the things that in the past she had only admired, and that they were not so admirable, and quite easy to do. But she disgraced the discovery by flaunting it. It was so evident that it was her shop, not she that had come into the room and spoiled the morning. Even now she was dwelling on next week. Inside her mind was nothing but her customers, travellers, the possible profits, her many plans for improvement. Nothing else could impress her. Anything she contributed would rest more than ever, now that Christmas Day was over, upon a background of absentminded complacency. Like herself, with the Brooms? Was it she who was being judged and not Eve? No, or only by herself. Harriett shared her new impressions of Eve, saw how eagerly in her clutch on her new interests she had renounced her old background of inexhaustible sympathy. Gerald did not. But men have no sense of atmosphere. They only see the appearances of things, understanding nothing of their relationships. Bewilderment, pessimistic philosophies, <em>regretful</em> poetry.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>The song might banish Eve’s self-assertion and bring back something of her old reality. Music, any music, would always make Eve real. Perhaps Elspeth would ask for it. But in the long inactive seconds, things had rushed ahead shattering the sunlit hour. Nothing could make it settle again. Eve had missed it forever. But she had discovered its presence. Its broken vestiges played about her retreat as she turned away to Elspeth; Gerald who alone was unconscious of her discovery, having himself been spellbound without recognising his whereabouts, was inaccessibly filling his pipe. She was far-off now, trying to break her way in by an attack on Elspeth. Miriam watched anxiously, reading the quality of their daily intercourse. Elspeth was responding with little imitative movements, arch smiles and gestures. Miriam writhed. Eve would teach her to see life as people, a few prominent overemphasised people in a fixed world.⁠ ⁠… But Elspeth soon broke away to trot up and down the hearthrug, and when Gerald caught and held her, asking as he puffed at his pipe above her head a rallying question about the shop, she stood propped looking from face to face, testing voices.</p>
			<p>The morning had changed to daytime.⁠ ⁠… Gerald and Eve made busy needless statements, going over in the form of question and answer the history of the shop, and things that had been obviously already discussed to exhaustion. Across Harriett’s face thoughts about Eve and her venture passed in swift comment on the conversation. Now and again she betrayed her impatience, leaping out into abrupt ironic emendations and presently rose with a gasp, thumping Miriam gently, “Come on, you’ve got to try on that blouse.” The colloquy snapped. Eve turned a flushed face and sat back looking uneasily into vacancy as if for something she had forgotten to say.</p>
			<p>“Try it on down here,” said Gerald.</p>
			<p>“Don’t be idiotic.”</p>
			<p>“It’s all right. <em>We</em> shan’t mind. We won’t look till she’s got it on.”</p>
			<p>“If you look then, you will be dazzled by my radiance.” Miriam stood listening in astonishment to the echoes of the phrase, fashioned from nothing upon her lips by something within her, unknown, wildly to be welcomed if its power of using words that left her not merely untouched and unspent, but taut and invigorated, should prove to be reliable. She watched the words go forward outside her with a life of their own, palpable, a golden thread between herself and the world, the first strand of a bright pattern she and Gerald would weave from their separate engrossments whenever their lives should cross. Through Gerald’s bantering acknowledgement she gazed out before her into the future, an endless perspective of blissful unbroken silence, shielded by the gift of speech.⁠ ⁠… The figure of Eve, sitting averted towards the fire, flung her back. To Eve her words were not silence; but a blow deliberately struck. With a thrill of sadness she recognised the creative power of anger. If she had not been angry with Eve she would have wondered whether Gerald were secretly amused by her continued interest in blouses, and have fallen stupidly dumb before the need of explaining, as her mind now rapidly proceeded to do, cancelling her sally as a base foreign achievement, that her interest was only a passing part of holiday relaxation, to be obliterated tomorrow by the renewal of a life that held everything he thought she was missing, in a way and with a quality new and rich beyond anything he could dream, and contemplating these things, would have silently left him with his judgment confirmed. She had moved before Gerald, safely ensphered in the life of words, and in the same movement was departing now, on the wings of Harriett’s rush, a fiend denying her kindred.</p>
			<p>Running upstairs she reflected that if the finished blouse suited her it was upon Eve that it would most powerfully cast its spell. The shoulders had been good. Defects in the other parts could not spoil them, and the squareness of her shoulders was an odd thing for which she was not responsible. Eve only admired them because hers sloped. She would come down again as the gay buffoon Eve used to know, letting the effect of the blouse be incidental, making today today, shaking them all out of the contemplation of circumstances. She would give some of her old speeches and musical sketches, if she could manage to begin when Gerald was not there, and Eve would laugh till she cried. No one would guess that she was buoyed up by her own invisible circumstances, forgotten as she browsed amongst new impressions, and now returning upon her moment by moment with accumulated force. But upstairs, confronted by Harriett in the summerlit seaside sunshine, she found the past half-hour between them, pressing for comment, and they danced silently confronting each other, dancing and dancing till they had said their say.</p>
			<p>The visit ended in the stillness that fell upon the empty carriage as the train left the last red-roofed houses behind and slid out into the open country. She swung for an instant over the spread of the town, serene unchanging sunlit grey, and brilliant white, green shuttered and balconied, towards the sea, warm yellow brick, red-roofed, towards the inland green, her visit still ahead of her. But the interiors of Eve’s dark little house and Harriett’s bright one slipped in between her and the pictured town, and the four days’ succession of incidents overtook her in disorder, playing themselves out, backwards and forwards, singly, in clear succession, two or three together, related to each other by some continuity of mood within herself, pell mell, swiftly interchanging, each scene in turn claiming the foremost place; moments stood out dark and overshadowing; the light that flooded the whole strove in vain to reach these painful peaks. The faraway spring offered a healing repetition of her visit; but the moments remained immovable. Eve would still be obstinately saying the Baws and really thinking she knew which side she was on.⁠ ⁠… Wawkup and Poole Carey⁠ ⁠… those were quotations as certainly as were Eve’s newspaper ideas; Wimpole Street quotations. The thing was that Eve had learned to want to be always in the right and was not swift enough in gathering things⁠ ⁠… not <em>worldly</em> enough. The train was rocking and swaying in its rush towards its first stop. After that the journey would seem only a few minutes, time passing more and more rapidly filled with the pressure of London coming nearer and nearer. But the junction was still a good way off.</p>
			<p>“No. It’s nothing of that kind. All Russian students are like that. They have everything in common. On the inside of the paper he had written it will be unfriendly if it should occur to you to feel any sentiment of resentment. What could I do? Oh yes they would. A Russian would think nothing of spending two pounds on chocolate if he wanted to. They live on bread too, nothing but bread and tea, some of them, for the sake of being able to work. What I can’t make him see is that although I am earning my living and he is not, he is preparing to earn a much more solid living than I ever shall. He says he is ashamed to be doing nothing while I am already independent. The next moment he is indignant that I have not enough for clothes and food; I have to be absolutely rude to make him let me pay for myself at restaurants. When I say it is worth it and I have enough much more than thousands of women workers he is silent with indignation. Then when I say that what is really wrong is that I have been cheated of my student period and ought to be living on somebody as a student, he says, pairhaps, but you are in <em>life</em>, that is the more important.”</p>
			<p>“All right, I will ask him. Poor little man. He has spent his Christmas at Tansley Street. He would adore Elspeth; although she is not a ‘beefsteak.’ He says there are no children in Europe finer than English children, and will stop suddenly in the middle of a serious conversation to say look, look; but <em>that</em> is a <em>real</em> English beefsteak.”</p>
			<p>Harry had partly understood. But she still clung to her private thoughts. Meeting him today would not be quite the same as before she had mentioned him to anyone. Summoning his familiar form she felt that her talk had been treachery. Yet not to have mentioned him at all felt like treachery too.</p>
			<p>“There’s quite an interesting Russian at Tansley Street now.” That meant simply nothing at all.⁠ ⁠… Christmas <em>had</em> been an interruption.⁠ ⁠… Perhaps something would have happened in his first days of London without her. Perhaps he would not appear this evening.</p>
			<p>Back at her work at Wimpole Street she forgot everything in a sudden glad realisation of the turn of the year. The sky was bright above the grey wall opposite her window. Soon there would be bright light in it at five o’clock, daylight remaining to walk home in, then at six, and she would see once more for another year the light of the sun on the green of the park. The alley of crocuses would come again, then daffodils in the grass and the green of the oncoming bluebells. Her table was littered with newly paid accounts, enough to occupy her pen for the short afternoon with pleasant writing, the reward of the late evenings spent before Christmas in hurrying out overdue statements, and the easy prelude to next week’s crowded work on the yearly balance sheets. She sat stamping and signing, and writing picturesque addresses, her eyes dwelling all the while in contemplation of the gift of the outspread year. The patients were few and no calls came from the surgeries. Tea came up while she still felt newly-arrived from the outside world, and the outspread scenes in her mind were gleaming still with fresh high colour in bright light, but the last receipt was signed, and a pile of envelopes lay ready for the post.</p>
			<p>She welcomed the sound of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Orly’s voice, tired and animated at the front door, and rose gladly as she came into the room with little bright broken incoherent phrases, and the bright deep unwearied dauntless look of welcome in her little tired face. She was swept into the den and kept there for a prolonged teatime, being questioned in detail about her Christmas in Eve’s shop, seeing <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Orly’s Christmas presents and presently moving in and out of groups of people she knew only by name. An extraordinary number of disasters had happened amongst them. She listened without surprise. Always all the year round these people seemed to live under the shadow of impending troubles. But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Orly’s dolorous list made Christmas seem to be, for them, a time devoted to the happening of things that crashed down in their midst, dealing out lifelong results. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Orly talked rapidly, satisfied with gestures of sympathy, but Miriam was conscious that her sympathy was not falling where it was demanded. She watched the family centres unmoved, her mind hovering over their imagined houses, looking regretfully at the shattered whole, the views from their windows that belonged to the past and were suddenly strange as when they had first seen them; passing on to their servants and friends and outwards into their social life, following results as far as she could, the principal sufferers impressing her all the time in the likeness of people who suddenly make avoidable disturbances in the midst of a conversation. Driven back, from the vast questioning silence at the end of her outward journey, to the centres of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Orly’s pictures, she tried to dwell sympathetically with the stricken people and fled aghast before their inexorable circumstances. They were all so hemmed in, so closely grouped that they had no free edges, and were completely, publicly at the mercy of the things that happened. Everyone in social life was aware of this. Experienced people said “there is always <em>something</em>,” “a skeleton in every cupboard.”⁠ ⁠… But why did people get into cupboards? Something or someone was to blame. In some way that pressed through the picture now in one form and now in another, just eluding expression in any single statement she could frame, these bright-looking lives, free of all that civilisation had to offer, were all to blame; all facing the same way, unaware of anything but the life they lived among themselves, they <em>made</em> the shadow that hung over them all; they invited its sudden descents.⁠ ⁠… She felt that her thoughts were cruel; like an unprovoked blow, worthy of instant revenge by some invisible observant third party; but even while in the presence of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Orly’s sympathy she accused herself of heartlessness and strove to retreat into a kindlier outlook, she was aware, moving within her conviction, of some dim shape of truth that no sympathy could veil.</p>
			<p>At six o’clock the front door closed behind her, shutting her out into the multitudinous pattering of heavy rain. With the sight of the familiar street shortened by darkness to a span lit faintly by dull rain-shrouded lamps, her years of daily setting forth into London came about her more clearly than ever before as a single unbroken achievement. Jubilantly she reasserted, facing the invitation flowing towards her from single neighbourhoods standing complete and independent, in inexhaustibly various loveliness through the procession of night and day, linked by streets and byways living in her as mood and reverie, that to have the freedom of London was a life in itself. Incidents from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Orly’s conversation pressing forward through her outcry, heightened her sense of freedom. If the sufferers were her own kindred, if disaster threatened herself, walking in London, she would pass into that strange familiar state, where all clamourings seemed unreal and on in the end into complete forgetfulness.</p>
			<p>Two scenes flashed forth from the panorama beyond the darkness and while she glanced at the vagrants stretched asleep on the grass in the Hyde Park summer, carefully to be skirted and yet most dreadfully claiming her companionship, she saw, narrow and gaslit, the little unlocated street that had haunted her first London years, herself flitting into it, always unknowingly, from a maze of surrounding streets, feeling uneasy, recognising it, hurrying to pass its awful centre where she must read the name of a shop, and, dropped helplessly into the deepest pit of her memory, struggle on through thronging images threatening, each time more powerfully, to draw her willingly back and back through the intervening spaces of her life to some deserved destruction of mind and body, until presently she emerged faint and quivering, in a wide careless thoroughfare. She had forgotten it; perhaps somehow learned to avoid it. Her imagined figure passed from the haunted scene, and from the vast spread of London the tide flowed through it, leaving it a daylit part of the whole, its spell broken and gone. She struggled with her stiffly opening umbrella, listening joyfully to the sound of the London rain. She asked nothing of life but to stay where she was, to go on.⁠ ⁠… London was her pillar of cloud and fire, undeserved, but unsolicited, life’s free gift. In still exultation she heard her footsteps go down into the street and along the streaming pavement. The light from a lamp just ahead fell upon a figure, plunging in a swift diagonal across the muddy roadway towards her. He had come to meet her⁠ ⁠… invading her street. She fled exasperated, as she slackened her pace, before this postponement of her meeting with London, and silently drove him off, as he swept round to walk at her side, asking him how he dared unpermitted to bring himself, and the evening, and the evening mood, across her inviolable hour. His overcoat was grey with rain and as she glanced he was scanning her silence with that slight quivering of his features. Poor brave little lonely man. He had spent his Christmas at Tansley Street.</p>
			<p>“Well? How was it?” he said. He was a gaoler, shutting her in.</p>
			<p>“Oh it was all right.”</p>
			<p>“Your sisters are well? Ah I <em>must</em> tell you,” his voice boomed confidently ahead into the darkness; “while I waited I have seen two of your doctors.”</p>
			<p>“They are not doctors.”</p>
			<p>“I had an immensely good impression. I find them both most fine English types.”</p>
			<p>“Hm; they’re absolutely English.” She saw them coming out, singly, preoccupied, into their street. English. He standing under his lamp, a ramshackle foreigner whom they might have regarded with suspicion, taking them in with a flash of his prepared experienced brown eye.</p>
			<p>“Abso-lutully. This unmistakable expression of humanity and fine sympathetic intelligence. Ah, it is fine.”</p>
			<p>“I <em>know</em>. But they have very simple minds, they quote their opinions.”</p>
			<p>“I do not say that you will find in the best English types a striking originality of <em>mentality</em>” he exclaimed reproachfully. Her attention pounced unwillingly upon the promised explanation of her own impressions, tired in advance at the prospect of travelling through his carefully pronounced sentences while the world she had come out to meet lay disregarded all about her. “But you will find what is perhaps more important, the characteristic features of your English civilisation.”</p>
			<p>“I know. I can <em>see</em> that; because I am neither English nor civilised.”</p>
			<p>“That is a nonsense. You are most English. No, but it is really most wonderful,” his voice dropped again to reverence and she listened eagerly, “how in your best aristocracy and in the best types of professional men, your lawyers and clerics and men of science, is to be read so strikingly this history of your nation. There is a something common to them all that shines out, <em xml:lang="de">durchleuchtend</em>, showing, sometimes, understand me, with almost a naivety, the centuries of your freedom. Ah it is not for nothing that the word gentleman comes from England.”</p>
			<p>“I know, I know what you mean,” said Miriam in contemplation, they <em>were</em> naive; showing their thoughts, in sets, readable, with shapes and edges, but it was the Tories and clerics who had the roomiest, most sympathetic expressions, liberals and nonconformists had no thoughts at all, only ideas. Lawyers had no ideas even.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“You would like my father; he hasn’t a scrap of originality, only that funny old-fashioned English quality from somewhere or other Heaven knows.”⁠ ⁠… and they could play chess together!⁠ ⁠… “But lawyers are not gentlemen. They are perfectly awful.”</p>
			<p>“That is a prejudice. Your English law is the very basis of your English freedom.”</p>
			<p>“They are awful. The others look Christians. They <em>don’t</em>.” Fancy defending Christianity.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“The thing you are seeing,” she said, “is Christianity. I don’t mean that there is anything in it; but Christian ideas have made English civilisation; that’s what it is. But how can you say all these things when you believe we are grabbing diamond mines?” Haw, <em>what</em>? Champagne and Grand pianos. Nice, jolly prejudiced <em>simpletons</em>; not even able to imagine that England ought not to have everything there was to be had, everywhere. Quite right, better for everybody⁠ ⁠… but⁠ ⁠… <i xml:lang="de">wir reiten, Pieter, reiten</i>⁠ ⁠… oh Lord⁠ ⁠… <em>who</em> was right?</p>
			<p>“Stop a bit, stop a bit. Christianity will not explain. There are other Christian countries where there is no sign of this thing that is in England. No. The explanation is very simple. It is that you have had in England through a variety of causes, not the least of which is your Protestant Reformation, a relatively very rapid and unrestricted <em>secular</em> development.”</p>
			<p>“What about Germany and Holland?”</p>
			<p>“Both quite different stories. There was in England a specially favourable gathering of circumstances for rapid secularistic development.”</p>
			<p>“Then if we have been made by our circumstances it is no credit to us.”</p>
			<p>“I have not said anything about <em>credit</em>.”</p>
			<p>“But there are people now who think we are dying of the Reformation; not the break with Rome; but with Catholic history and tradition. No, wait a minute, it’s interesting. They have discovered, <em>proved</em>, that there was Christianity in Britain, and British Christian Churches, long before the Romans came. That means that we are as old, and as direct as Rome. The Pope is nothing but a Roman Bishop. I feel it is an immense relief, to know we go right back, <em>ourselves</em>; when I think of it.”</p>
			<p>“All these clericalisms are immaterial to <em>life</em>.”</p>
			<p>“Then there were two Popes at one time, and there is the Greek church. I wonder Newman didn’t think of that. Now <em>he</em> is one of your fine English types, although he looks scared, as if he had seen a ghost. If he had known about the early British church perhaps he would not have gone over to Rome.”</p>
			<p>“I cannot follow all this. But what is indisputable is, that in every case of religious authority, secular development has been held back. Buckle has completely demonstrated this in a most masterly exhaustive consideration of the civilisations of Europe. Ah it is <em>marvellous</em>, this book, one of your finest decorations; and without any smallest touch of fanaticism; he is <em>indeed</em> perhaps one of your greatest minds of the best English type, full of sensibility and fine gentleness.”</p>
			<p>Miriam was back, as she listened, in the Chiswick villa, in bed in the yellow lamplight with a cold, the pages of the Apologia reading themselves without effort into her molten mind, as untroubled beauty and happiness, making what Newman sought seem to be at home in herself, revealing deep inside life a whole new strange place of existence that was yet familiar, so that the gradual awful gathering of his trouble was a personal experience, and the moment of conviction that schism was a deliberate death, a personal conviction. She wondered why she always forgot that the problem had been solved. Glancing beyond the curve of her umbrella she caught, with his last words, the sudden confident grateful shining of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Shatov’s lifted face and listened eagerly.</p>
			<p>“It is this one thing,” she lifted the umbrella his way in sudden contrition, shifting it so that it sheltered neither of them; “Thank you I am quite well. It is hardly now raining,” he muttered at his utmost distance of foreign intonation and bearing. She peered out into the air, shutting her umbrella. They had come out of their way, away from the streets into a quietness. It must be the Inner Circle. They would have to walk right round it.</p>
			<p>“It is this one thing,” again it was as if her own voice were speaking, “this thesis of the <em>conditions</em> of the development of peoples,” Anglican priests <em>married</em>; but not the highest high-Anglican. But they were always going over to Rome⁠ ⁠… “that has made your Buckle so precious to the Russian intelligentsia. In England he is scarcely now read, though I have seen by the way his works in this splendid little edition of World Classics, the same as your Emerson, why did you take only Emerson? There is a whole row, the most fascinating things.”</p>
			<p>“My Emerson was given to me. I didn’t know it came from anywhere in particular.”</p>
			<p>“This Richards must be a most enlightened publisher. I should wish to possess all those volumes. The Buckle I will certainly take at once and you shall see. He is of course out of date in the matter of exact science and this is no doubt part reason why in England he is no more read. It is a great pity. His mind is perhaps greater than even your Darwin, certainly with a far wider philosophical range, and of <em>far</em> greater originality. What is wonderful is his actual anticipation, in idea, without researches, of a large part of what Darwin discovered more accidentally, as a result of his immense naturalistic researches.”</p>
			<p>“Someone will discover some day that Darwin’s conclusions were wrong, that he left out some little near obvious thing with big results, and his theory, which has worried thousands of people nearly to death, will turn out to be one of those everlasting mannish explanations of everything which explain nothing. I know what you are going to say; a subsequent reversal of a doctrine does not invalidate scientific method. I know. But these everlasting theories, and men are so ‘eminent’ and important about them, are appalling; in medicine, it is simply <em>appalling</em>, and people are just as ill as ever; and when they know Darwin was mistaken, there will be an end of Herbert Spencer. There’s my father, really an intelligent man, he has done scientific research himself and knew Faraday, and he thinks First Principles the greatest book that was ever written. I have argued and argued but he says he is too old to change his cosmos. It makes me simply ill to think of him living in a cosmos made by Herbert Spencer.”</p>
			<p>“<em>Wait.</em> Excuse me but that is all too easy. In matter of science the conclusions of Darwin will <em>never</em> be displaced. It is as the alphabet of biology, as Galilei is of Astronomy. More. These researches even need not be made again. They are for all time verified. Herbert Spencer I agree has carried too far in too wholesale a manner conclusions based on Darwin’s discoveries; conclusions may lead to many inapplicable theories, that is immaterial; but Darwin himself made no such theories. There is no question of <em>opinion</em> as to his discoveries; he supplies simply unanswerable <em>facts</em>.”</p>
			<p>“I think it’s Huxley who makes me angry with Darwinism. He didn’t find it out, and he went swaggering about using it as a weapon; <em>frightfully</em> conceited about it. That Thomas Henry Huxley should come off best in an argument was quite as important to him as spreading the Darwinian theory. I <em>never</em> read anything like his accounts of his victories in his letters.”</p>
			<p>“That is most certainly not the spirit of Darwin, who was a most gentle creature.⁠ ⁠… But you really surprise me in your attitude towards the profession of law.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know anything whatever about laws; but I have met lawyers, barristers and solicitors, and I think they are the most ignorant, pigheaded people in the world. They have no minds at all. They don’t affect <em>me</em>. But if I were ever before a judge I should shoot him. They use cases to show off their silly wit, sitting thinking of puns; and people are put to death.”</p>
			<p>“You are in this matter both prejudiced and unjust, believe me. You cannot in any case make individuals responsible in this matter of capital punishment. That is for all humanity. I see you are like myself, a dreamer. But it is bad to let what might be, blind you to <em>actuality</em>. To the great actuality, in this case, that in matters of justice between man and man <em>England</em> has certainly led the civilised world. In France, it is true, there is a certain special generosity towards certain types of provoked crime; but France has not the large responsibilities of England. The idea of abstract justice, is stronger in England than anywhere. But what you do not see is that in confessing ignorance of your law you pay it the highest possible tribute. You do not know what individual liberty is because you know nothing of any other condition. Ah you cannot conceive what strangeness and wonder there is for a Russian in this spectacle of a people so free that they hold their freedom as a matter of course.”</p>
			<p><em>Decked.</em> Distinguished. Marked among the nations, for unconscious qualities. What <em>is</em> England? What do the qualities mean?</p>
			<p>“I’m not interested in laws. If I knew what they were I should like to break them. Trespassers will be prosecuted always makes me furious.”</p>
			<p>“That is merely a technical bylaw. That is just one of your funny English high-churchishnesses this trespassers⁠ ⁠… ah I must tell you I was just now in the Hyde Park. There was a meeting, ah it was indeed wonderful to me all these people freely gathered together! There was some man addressing them, I could not hear, but suddenly a man near me on the outskirt of the crowd shouted in full voice ‘Chamberlain is a damned <em>liar</em>!’ Yes, but wait for your English laughter. That is not the whole. There was also quite near me, a very big John Bull <em>bobby</em>. He turned to pass on, with a <em>smile</em>. Ah that indeed for a Russian was a most <em>wonderful</em> spectacle.”</p>
			<p>“We ought to be hurrying,” said Miriam, burning with helpless pity and indignation, “you will be late for dinner.”</p>
			<p>“That is true. Shall you not also take dinner? Or if you prefer we can dine elsewhere. The air is most pure and lovely. We are in some Park?”</p>
			<p>“Regent’s Park,” she said hastily, breathing in its whole circumference, her eyes passing, through the misty gloom, amongst daylit pictures of every part. He had not known even where he was; completely foreign, a mind from an unknown world, obliviously at her side. A headlong urgency possessed her; the coming back to London had not yet been; perhaps this time she would miss it; already she was tired with thought and speech. Incoherently improvising an appointment she hurried along, her mind set excitedly towards Tansley Street. There was always some new thing waiting there when she returned from an absence; she could hear about it and get over her greetings and out for an hour by herself. She increased her pace until <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Shatov panted for breath as he plunged along by her side. The random remarks she made to cover her thoughts hurtled about in the darkness, stabbing her with vindictive unhelpful comments on her English stiffness, embarrassing her gait and increasing her angry fatigue. He responded in breathless shouts as if they were already in the crowded streets. They reached pavement, big houses loomed up out of the mist, the gates were just ahead. We had better rather at once take an omnibus, he shouted as they emerged into the Euston Road and a blue umbrella bus passed heavily by. She hurried forward to catch it at the corner. That goes only to <em>Gower</em> Street, thundered his following voice. She was in amongst the crowd at the corner and as again the bus lumbered off, inside it in the one remaining seat.</p>
			<p>In the dimly lit little interior, moving along through the backward flowing mist-screened street lights, she dropped away from the circling worlds of sound, and sat thoughtless gazing inward along the bright kaleidoscopic vistas that came unfailing and unchanged whenever she was moving, alone and still, against the moving tide of London. When the bus pulled up for a moment in a block, she searched the gloom-girt forms within her view. The blue light of the omnibus lamp lit up faces entangled in visible thoughts, unwillingly suffering the temporary suspension of activity, but in the far corner there was one, alive and aware, gazing untrammelled at visions like her own, making them true, the common possession of all who would be still. Why were these people only to be met in omnibuses and now and again walking sightless along crowded streets? Perhaps in life they were always surrounded with people with whom they did not dare to be still. In speech that man would be a little defensive and cynical. He had a study, where he went to get away from everything, to work; sometimes he only pretended to work. He did not guess that anyone outside books, certainly not any <em>women</em> anywhere⁠ ⁠… the bus rumbled on again; by the time it reached Gower Street she had passed through thoughtless ages. The brown house and her room in it called to her recreated. Once through the greetings awaiting her, she would be free upstairs amongst its populous lights and shadows; perhaps get in unseen and keep her visions untouched through the evening. She would have an evening’s washing and ironing. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Shatov would not expect her tonight.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey, hurrying through the hall to dinner, came forward dropping bright quiet cries of welcome from the edge of her fullest mood of excited serenity, gently chiding Miriam’s inbreaking expectant unpreparedness with her mysterious gradual way of imparting bit by bit, so that it was impossible to remember how and when she had begun, the new thing; lingering silently at the end of her story to disarm objections before she turned and flitted, with a reassuring pleading backward smile, into her newly crowded dining-room. A moment later Miriam was in the drawing-room, swiftly consulting the profile of a tweed-clad form bent busily writing at the little table under the gas. The man leapt up and faced her with a swift ironic bow, strode to the hearthrug and began to speak. She remained rooted in the middle of the room amplifying her impression as his sentence went on, addressed not to her, though he occasionally flung a cold piercing glance her way, but to the whole room, in a high, narrowly-rounded, fluting tone as if he were speaking into a cornet. His head had gone up above the level of the brighter light but it looked even more greyish yellow than before, the sparse hair, the eyes, the abruptly branching moustache moving most remarkably with his fluting voice, the pale tweed suit, all one even yellowish grey, and his whole reared up, half soldierly form, at bay, as if the room were full of jeering voices. His long declamation contained all that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey had said and told her also that the lecture was about Spanish literature. London was extraordinary. A Frenchman, suddenly giving a lecture in English on Spanish literature; at the end of next week. He wound up his tremendous sentence by telling her that she was a secretary, and must excuse his urgency, that he required the services of an English secretary and would now, with her permission read the first part of the lecture that she might tell him whenever his intonation was at fault. That would be <em>immensely</em> interesting and easy she thought, and sat down on the music stool while he gathered up his sheaf of papers and explained that foreign intonation was the always neglected cornerstone of the mastery of a foreign tongue.</p>
			<p>In a moment he was back again on the hearthrug, beginning his lecture in a tone that was such an exaggeration of his conversational voice, so high-pitched and whistlingly rounded, so extremely careful in enunciation that Miriam could hear nothing but a loud thin hooting, full of the echoes of the careful beginnings and endings of English words.</p>
			<p>The first sentence was much longer than his address to her and when it ended she did not know how or where to begin. But he had taken a step forward on the hearthrug and begun another sentence, on a higher pitch, with a touch of anger in his voice. She checked a spasm of laughter and sat tense, trying to ignore the caricature of his style that gambolled in her mind. The sentence, even longer than the first, ended interrogatively with a fling of the head. It was <em>tragic</em>. She was quick, quicker than anyone she knew, in catching words or meanings through strange disguises. An audience would be either furious or hysterical.</p>
			<p>“You don’t want to <em>threaten</em> your audience,” she said very quietly in a low tone, hoping by contrast to throw up his clamour.</p>
			<p>“I dew not threaten,” he said with suave patience, “doubtless hew are misled. It is a great occasion; and a great subject; of hwich I am master; in these circumstances a certain bravura is imperative. Hew du not propose that I should <em>plead</em> for Cervantes for example? I will continue.”</p>
			<p>The sentences grew in length, each one climbing, through a host of dependent clauses, small sharp hammer blows of angry assertion, and increasing in tone to a climax of defiance flung down from a height that left no further possibility but a descent to a level quiet deduction⁠ ⁠… and <em>now</em> dear brethren⁠ ⁠… but the succeeding sentence came fresh to the attack, crouching, gathering up the fury of its forerunner, leaping forward, dipping through still longer dependent loops, accumulating, swelling and expanding to even greater emphasis and volume. She gave up all hope of gathering even the gist of the meaning; he seemed to be saying one thing over and over again. You protest too much⁠ ⁠… don’t <em>protest</em>; don’t <em>gesticulate</em>⁠ ⁠… the English don’t gesticulate⁠ ⁠… but he used no gesticulations; he was aware; that was a deliberate attempt to be English. But his whole person was a gesture, expanding, vibrating.</p>
			<p>“You mean by intonation only the intonation of single words, not of the whole?”</p>
			<p>“Precisely. Correctness of accent and emphasis is my aim. But you imply a criticism,” he fluted, unshaken by his storm.</p>
			<p>“Yes. First you must not pronounce each word quite so carefully. It makes them <em>echo</em> into each other. Then of course if you want to be quite English you must be less emphatic.”</p>
			<p>“I must assume an air of indifference?”</p>
			<p>“An English audience will be more likely to understand if you are slower and more quiet. You ought to have gaps now and then.”</p>
			<p>“Intervals for yawning. Yew shall indicate suitable moments. I see that I am fortunate to have met-hew. I will take lessons, for this lecture, in the true frigid English dignity.”</p>
			<p>The door opened, admitting <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Shatov.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>⁠—a⁠—Shatov; will be so good; as to grant five minutes; for the conclusion of this interview.” He walked forward bowing with each phrase, hiding the intruder and bowing him out of the room. The little dark figure reappeared punctually, and he rose with a snap of the fingers. “The English,” he declaimed at large, “have an excellent phrase; hwich says, time is money. This phrase, good though it is, might be improved. Time is let out on usury. So, for the present, I shall leave yew.” He turned on the sweeping bow that accompanied his last word and stepped quickly with a curious stiff marching elegance down the room towards <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Shatov as though he did not see him, avoiding him at the last moment by a sharp curve. Outside the closed door he rattled the handle as if to make sure it was quite shut.</p>
			<p>Miriam sought intently for a definition of what had been in the room⁠ ⁠… a strange echoing shadow of some real thing⁠ ⁠… there was something real⁠ ⁠… just behind the empty sound of him⁠ ⁠… somewhere in the rolled up manuscript so remarkably in her hands, making a difference in the evening brought in by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Shatov. Hunger and fatigue were assailing her; but the long rich day mounting up to an increasing sense of incessant life crowding upon her unsought, at her disposal, could not be snapped by retirement for a solitary meal. He walked quickly to the hearthrug, bent forward and spat into the empty grate.</p>
			<p>“<em>What</em> is this fellow?”</p>
			<p>She broke through her frozen astonishment, “I have just undertaken a perfectly frightful thing,” she said, quivering with disgust.</p>
			<p>“I find him insufferable.”</p>
			<p>“The French sing their language. It is like a recitative, the tone goes up and down and along and up and down again with its own expression; the words have to fit the tune. They have no single abrupt words and phrases, the whole thing is a <em>shape</em> of <em>tones</em>. It’s extraordinary. All somehow arranged; in a pattern; different patterns for the expression of the different emotions. In their English it makes the expression swallow up the words, a wind driving through them continuously⁠ ⁠… liaison.”</p>
			<p>“It is a musical tongue certainly.”</p>
			<p>“That’s it; music. But the individual is not there; because the tunes are all arranged for him and he sings them, according to rule. The Academy. The purity of the French language. I’m getting so interested.”</p>
			<p>“I find this Lahitte a most <em>pretentious</em> fellow.”</p>
			<p>“He is not in the least what I expected a Frenchman to be like. I can’t understand his being so fair.”</p>
			<p>“What is it you have undertaken?”</p>
			<p>He was suddenly grave and impressed by the idea of the lecture⁠ ⁠… why would it be such good practice for her to read and correct it?</p>
			<p>Her answer plunged him into thought from which he branched forth with sudden eagerness⁠ ⁠… a French translation of a Russian book revealing marvellously the interior, the self life, of a doctor, through his training and experience in practice. It would be a revelation to English readers and she should translate it; in collaboration with him; if she would excuse the intimate subjects it necessarily dealt with. He was off and back again with the book and reading rapidly while she still pondered his grave enthusiasm over her recent undertaking. In comparison with this idea of translating a book, it seemed nothing. But that was only one of his wild notions. It would take years of evenings of hard work. Meanwhile someone else would do it. They would work at it together. With Saturdays and Sundays it would not take so long⁠ ⁠… it would set her standing within the foreign world she had touched at so many points during the last few years, and that had become, since the coming of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Shatov, more and more clearly a continuation of the first beginnings at school⁠ ⁠… <i xml:lang="fr">alors un faible chuchotement se fit entendre au premier⁠ ⁠… à l’entrée de ce bassin, des arbres⁠ ⁠… se fit entendre⁠ ⁠… alors un faible chuchotement se fit entendre</i>⁠ ⁠… all one word on one tone⁠ ⁠… it must have been an extract from some dull mysterious story with an explanation or deliberately without an explanation; then a faint whispering was audible on the first floor; that was utterly different. It was the shape and sound of the sentences, without the meaning that was so wonderful⁠—<i xml:lang="fr">alors une faible parapluie se fit entendre au premier</i>⁠—Jan would scream, but it was just as wonderful⁠ ⁠… there must be some meaning in having so passionately loved the little book without having known that it was selections from French prose; in getting to Germany and finding there another world of beautiful shape and sound, apart from people and thoughts and things that happened.⁠ ⁠… <i xml:lang="de">Durch die ganze lange Nacht, bis tief in den Morgen hinein</i>⁠ ⁠… it was opening again, drawing her in away from the tuneless shapeless⁠—</p>
			<p>“Are you listening?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, but it hasn’t begun.”</p>
			<p>“That is true. We can really omit all this introduction and at once begin.”</p>
			<p>As the pages succeeded each other her hunger and fatigue changed to a fever of anxious attention.</p>
			<p>“Well? Is not that a masterly analysis? You see. That should be translated for your Wimpole Street.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know. We are not like that. It would never occur to an English doctor to write for the general public anything that could shake its confidence in doctors. Foreigners are different. They think nothing of revealing and discussing the most awful things. It’s pessimism. They <em>like</em> pessimism.”</p>
			<p>“It is a serious mistake to regard enlightenment as pessimism.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t believe in Continental luminaries.”</p>
			<p>“Your prejudices are at least frank.”</p>
			<p>“I had forgotten the author was Russian. That idea of the rush of mixed subjects coming to the medical student too quickly one after the other for anything to be taken in, is awful, and perfectly true. Hosts of subjects, hosts of different theories about all of them; no general ideas.⁠ ⁠… Doctors have to specialise when they are boys and they remain ignorant all their lives.”</p>
			<p>“This is not only for doctors. You have touched the great problem of modern life. No man can, today, see over the whole field of knowledge. The great Leibnitz was the last to whom this was possible.”</p>
			<p>To be ignorant always, knowing one must die in ignorance. What was the use of going on? Life looked endless. Suddenly it would seem short. “Wait till you’re fifty and the years pass like weeks.” You would begin to see clearly all round you the things you could never do. Never go to Japan. Already it was beginning. No college. No <i xml:lang="de">wanderjahre</i>.⁠ ⁠… Translating books might lead to <i xml:lang="de">wanderjahre</i>.</p>
			<p>“It’s certainly a book that ought to be translated.” At least there could be no more “Eminent men.” There might always be someone at work somewhere who would suddenly knock him down like a ninepin.</p>
			<p>“Well you shall see. I will read you a passage from later, that you may judge whether you will care. I must tell you it deals of intimate matters. You must excuse.”</p>
			<p>It was not only that he thought she might object. He also realised that the English reserves between them were being swept away. It was strange that a free Russian should have these sensibilities. He read his extract through, bringing it to a close in shaken tones, his features sensitively working.</p>
			<p>Everyone ought to know.⁠ ⁠… It ought to be shouted from the housetops that a perfectly ordinary case leaves the patient <i xml:lang="fr">sans connaissance et nageant dans le sang</i>.</p>
			<p>“It’s very interesting,” she said hurriedly, “but in English it would be condemned as unsuitable for general reading.”</p>
			<p>“I thought that possible.”</p>
			<p>“The papers would solemnly say that it deals with subjects that are better veiled.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed it is remarkable. John Bull is indeed the perfect ostrich.”</p>
			<p>“Oh those men who write like that don’t want them veiled from <em>themselves</em>.”</p>
			<p>“I will tell you more than that. The Paris pornographia <em>lives</em> on its English patrons.”</p>
			<p>“Oh no; I’m sure it doesn’t.”</p>
			<p>“On the contrary I assure you this is a fact. Any French bookseller will tell you. I see that this distresses you. It is not perhaps in every case so base as would appear. There is always even in quite deliberate French obscenity a certain <em>esprit</em>. These subjects lend themselves.”</p>
			<p>“Oh they don’t care about the esprit. It’s because they think they are being improper. They like to be what they call men of the world, in possession of a fund of things they think can’t be talked about; you can see their silly thoughts by the way they glance at each other; it’s all about nothing. What <em>is</em> obscenity? And the other half of them is <em>ladies</em>, who shout things by always carefully avoiding them; or, if they are ‘racey,’ flatter men’s topics by laughing in a pretended hilarious embarrassment, hitting them as it were, and rushing on to something else, very animated by a becoming blush. I never realised that before. But that’s the secret. What <em>is</em> obscenity?”</p>
			<p>“You have touched a most interesting problem of psychology.”</p>
			<p>“Besides Paris is full of Americans.”</p>
			<p>“It is the same proposition. They are the cousins of the English.”</p>
			<p>“I think the American ‘man of the world’ is much more objectionable. He is so horribly raw that he can’t help boasting openly, and the American woman flatters him, openly. It’s extraordinary. I mean the kind of heavy-featured fat middle-aged American woman who doesn’t smoke and thinks that voting would be unseemly for women. It used to make me simply ill with fury.⁠ ⁠… <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Bunyan Hopkinson’s brother came over for July and August two years ago. He was appalling. With a bright fair beard, and a most frightful twang; the worst I’ve ever heard. He used to talk incessantly, as if the whole table were waiting for his ideas. And knew everything, in the most awful superficial newspaper way. They have absolutely no souls at all. I never saw an American soul. The Canadians have. The Americans, at least the women, have reproachful ideals that they all agree about. So that they are all like one person; all the same effect. But wasn’t it <em>screaming</em>, Bunyan Hopkinson’s brother was called <em>Bacchus</em>. Yes. Did you ever hear anything so screaming? Isn’t that enough? Doesn’t it explain everything? He was a doctor too. He sat next to an elderly woman who was always scolding and preaching. She had an enormous American figure, and Guelph eyelids and Guelph cheeks coming down below her chin making great lengthways furrows on either side of it. But when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Bacchus began to talk about Paris she would listen respectfully. He used always to be offering to show other men round Paris. There’s no-one alive, he would say, can show me anything in Parrus nightlife I’ve not seen. <em>Ah</em>, she would say, anyone can see you’re a man of the <em>world</em>, doctor. It spoils the very idea of those little cabarets and whatever awful haunts there may be in Paris to think of Americans there, seeing <em>nothing</em>.”</p>
			<p>“They have certainly a most remarkable naivety.”</p>
			<p>“I’ve today seen your Queen. She’s just a vurry <em>hoamely</em> little old lady.”</p>
			<p>“What? What is that?”</p>
			<p>“Then they <em>were</em> funny.” She searched her memory to make him go on giggling. It was extraordinary too, to discover what impressions she had gathered without knowing it, never considering or stating them to herself. He was getting them. If she ever stated them again they would be stale; practised clever talk; <em>that</em> was how talk was done⁠ ⁠… saying things over and over again to numbers of people, each time a little more brilliantly and the speaker a little more dead behind it. Nothing could be repeated.</p>
			<p>“That was the same year. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bailey had a splendid August. Eighteen Americans. I used to go down to meals just to be in the midst of the noise. You never heard anything like it in your life. If you listened without trying to distinguish anything it was <em>marvellous</em>, in the bright sunshine at breakfast. It sent you up and up, into the sky, the morning stars singing together. <em>No.</em> I mean there was something <em>really</em> wonderful about it. It reminded me of the effect that almost comes when people decide to have a Dutch concert. You know. All singing different songs at the same time. It’s <em>always</em> spoilt. People begin it prepared not to hear the whole effect. I did. I did not realise there would be a wonderful whole. And always just as the effect is beginning, two or three people break down because they cannot hold their songs, and some laugh because they are prepared only to laugh, and the unmusical people put their fingers to their ears, because they can never hear <em>sound</em>, never anything but a tune. Oh it would be so wonderful, if only it could be really <em>held</em>, everyone singing for all they were worth.”</p>
			<p>“Have you heard that the Shah preferred of a whole concert, only the tuning of the orchestra?”</p>
			<p>“I know. That’s always supposed to be a joke. But the tuning of an orchestra, if there is enough of it at once, <em>is</em> wonderful. Why not <em>both</em>? It’s the appalling way people have of liking only one thing. Liking ‘good’ music and disapproving of waltzes. The Germans don’t.”</p>
			<p>“But when I thought of one of my sisters, I used to want to die. If she had been there we should both have yelled, without moving a muscle of our faces. Harriett is perfect for that. We learnt it in church. But when she used to twist all the fingers of her gloves into points, under the seat, and then show them to me suddenly, in the Litany.”⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“What? What is this? No. Tell me. You were very happy with your sisters.”</p>
			<p>“That’s all. She waggled them, suddenly.”</p>
			<p>“A happy childhood is perhaps the <em>most</em>-fortunate gift in life.”</p>
			<p>“You don’t know you’re happy.”</p>
			<p>“That is not the point. This early surrounding lingers and affects all the life.”</p>
			<p>“It’s not quite true that you don’t know. Because you know when you are quite young how desperately you love a place. The day we left our first home I remember putting marbles in my pocket in the nursery, not minding, only thinking I should take them out again by the <em>sea</em>, and downstairs in the garden I suddenly realised, the sun was shining on to the porch and bees swinging about amongst the roses, and I ran back and kissed the warm yellow stone of the house, sobbing most bitterly and knowing my life was at an end.”</p>
			<p>“But you were six years old. That is what is important. You do not perhaps realise the extent of the remaining of this free life of garden and woods with you.”</p>
			<p>“I know it is there. I often dream I am there and wake there, and for a few minutes I could draw the house, the peaked shapes of it, and the porches and french windows and the way the lawns went off into the mysterious parts of the garden; and I feel then as if going away were still to come, an awful thing that had never happened. Of course after the years in the small house by the sea, I don’t remember the house, only the sea and the rocks, the house at Barnes grew in a way to be the same, but I never got over the suddenness of the end of the garden and always expected it to branch out into distances, every time I ran down it. I used to run up and down to make it more.⁠ ⁠…” He was no longer following with such an intentness of interest. There ought to have been more about those first years. Now, no one would ever know what they had been.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“But you know, although nothing the Americans say is worth hearing, there is something wonderful about the way they go on. The way they all talk at once, nobody listening. It’s because they all know what they are going to say and everyone wants to say it first. They used to talk in parties; a set of people at one part of the table all screaming together towards a set at another part, and other people screaming across them at another set. The others began screaming back at once, endless questions, and if two sets had seen the same thing they all screamed together as soon as it was mentioned. I never heard one person talking alone; not in that August set. And there was one woman, a clergyman’s wife, with a little pretty oval face and the most perfect muslin dresses which she did not appreciate, who used to begin as soon as she came in and go on right through the meal, filling up the gaps in her talk with gasps and exclamations. Whenever any place was mentioned she used to turn and put her hand over her husband’s mouth till she had begun what she wanted to say, jumping up and down in her chair.”</p>
			<p>“Is it <em>possible</em>?”</p>
			<p>“I know now why they all have such high piercing voices. It comes from talking in sets. But I always used to wonder what went on behind; in their own minds.”</p>
			<p>“Do not wonder. There is no <i xml:lang="fr">arrière-boutique</i> in these types. They are most simple.”</p>
			<p>“They don’t like us. They think we are frigid; not cordial, is one of their phrases.”</p>
			<p>“That is a most superficial judgment. Stay! I have a splendid idea. We will leave for the present this large book. But why should you not immediately translate a story of Andrayeff? They are quite short and most beautiful. You will find them unlike anything you have read. I have them here. We will at once read one.”</p>
			<p>“I must go out; it will soon be too late.”</p>
			<p>“You have had no dinner? Ach, that is <em>monstrous</em>. Why did you not tell me?⁠ ⁠… It is half eleven. There is yet time. We will go to my <i xml:lang="de">dumme August</i> in the East-end.”</p>
			<p>In her room, Miriam glanced at the magic pages, hungrily gathering German phrases, and all the way to Aldgate, sitting back exhausted in her corner she clung to them, resting in a “<i xml:lang="de">stube</i>” with “<i xml:lang="de">Gebirge</i>” all round it in morning and evening light. When they reached their destination she had forgotten she was in London. But the station was so remote and unknown to her that it scarcely disturbed her detachment. The wide thoroughfare into which they emerged was still and serene within its darkness behind the spread veil of street sounds, filled with the pure sweet air of adventure. The restaurant across the road was a little square of approaching golden light. It was completely strange. There was a tang of coarse tobacco in the air, but not the usual restaurant smell. There were no marble-topped tables; little square wooden-legged tables, with table-covers of red and blue chequered cotton; pewter flagons, foreigners, Germans, sturdy confident Germans sitting about. It was Germany.</p>
			<p>“Well? Is it not perfectly <i xml:lang="de">dumme August</i>?” whispered <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Shatov as they took an empty corner table, commanding the whole room. There was a <em>wooden</em> partition behind them, giving out life. Her fatigue left her.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="de">Für mich ist es absolut als wär ich in Hannover.</i>”</p>
			<p>“At least here you shall have an honest meal. <i xml:lang="de">Kellner!</i>”</p>
			<p>She did not want to eat; only to sit and hear the deep German voices all round her and take in, without observation, kindly German forms.</p>
			<p>“Simply you are too tired. We will have at least some strong soup and Lager.”</p>
			<p>The familiar smooth savoury broth abolished the years since she had left Germany. Once more she was finding the genuine honest German quality reflected in the completeness of their food; all of it even the bread, savoury and good through and through, satisfying in a way no English food was satisfying, making English food seem poor, ill-combined, either heavy and dull, or too exciting. She saw German kitchens, <i xml:lang="de">alles rein und sauber, blank poliert</i>, large bony low-browed angry-voiced German servants in check dresses and blue aprons, everlastingly responsibly at work.</p>
			<p>And here was Lager, the Lager of the booming musical German cafés. She was sure she would not like it. He was taking for granted that she was accustomed to beer, and would not know that she was having a tremendous adventure. To him it did not seem either shocking or vulgar. Protected by his unconsciousness she would get perhaps further than ever before into the secret of Germany. She took a small sip and shuddered. The foamy surface was pleasant; but the strange biting bitterness behind it was like some sudden formidable personal attack.</p>
			<p>“That is the first time I’ve tasted beer,” she said, “I don’t like it.”</p>
			<p>“You have not yet tasted it. You must swallow, not sip.”</p>
			<p>“It makes your throat sore. It’s so bitter. I always imagined beer was sweet.”</p>
			<p>“There is perhaps something a little acid in this imported Lager; but the bitterness is most good. It is this biting quality that is a most excellent apératif. We will have also honey cakes.”</p>
			<p>The light, not too sweet, porous crisp mealiness of the little cakes was German altogether. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Shatov was whispering busily. She feared he would be heard. There was not much conversation in the room; large deep solid sentences reverberated through it with a sound of thoughtfulness, as though the speakers were preoccupied, like travellers, talking with their eyes turned inward upon their destination. All of them appeared serious and sober.</p>
			<p>“Just as we crossed the frontier one big fat German roused up and said in an <em>immense</em> rolling voice. ‘<i xml:lang="de">Hier kann man wenigstens vernunftiges <em>Bier</em> haben!</i>’ ”</p>
			<p>“Ssh! They will hear.”</p>
			<p>“What then? They are here nearly all Jews.”</p>
			<p>“Jews? But they are nearly all <em>fair</em>!”</p>
			<p>“There may be a few Germans. But many Jews are fair. But you have not told me what you think of this story.”</p>
			<p>“Oh I can <em>see</em> the man and hear his voice”⁠ ⁠… Nearly all the people in the room were dark. It was the man sitting near, with the large fresh fair German face who had made her imagine the room was full of Germans. But there were no hooked noses; no one in the least like Shylock. What <em>were</em> Jews? How did he know the room was full of them? Why did the idea cast a chill on the things she had brought in with her? She drew the little book from her pocket and took a long draught of Lager. It was still bitter, but the bitterness was only an astringent tang in the strange cool lively frothy tide; a tingling warmth ran through her nerves, expanding to a golden glow that flowed through the room and held her alight within itself, an elastic impalpable bodiless mind. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Shatov was sitting far away at her side, in his eyes a serene communion with his surroundings. It was not his usual restaurant manner; it was strange⁠ ⁠… pewter was right; Lager was a bright tumult, frothing and flowing easily over the smooth dull metal.</p>
			<p>Translating the phrases made them fall to pieces. She tried several renderings of a single phrase; none of them would do; the original phrase faded, and together with it just beyond her reach, the right English words. Scraps of conversation reached her from all over the room; eloquent words, fashioned easily, without thought, a perfect flowing of understanding, to and fro, without obstruction. No heaven could be more marvellous. People talked incessantly because in silence they were ghosts. A single word sounded the secret of the universe⁠ ⁠… there is a dead level of intelligence throughout humanity. She listened in wonder whilst she explained aloud that she had learned most of her French by reading again and again for the sake of the long even rhythm of its sentences, one book; that this was the only honest way to acquire a language. It was like a sea, each sentence a wave rolling in, rising till the light shone through its glistening crest, dropping, to give way to the next oncoming wave, the meaning gathering, accumulating, coming nearer with each rising falling rhythm; each chapter a renewed tide, monotonously repeating throughout the book in every tone of light and shade the same burden, the secret of everything in the world.</p>
			<p>“I cannot appreciate these literary preciosities; but I am quite sure that you are wrong in confining yourself to this one French book. This mystical philosophy is <i xml:lang="fr">énervant</i>. There are many French books you should read before this man. Balzac for instance.”</p>
			<p>She wanted to explain that she used to read novels but could not get interested in them after Emerson. They showed only one side of people, the outside; if they showed them alone, it was only to explain what they felt about other people. Then he would say Levin, Levin. But she could not attend to all this. What she had meant to say in the beginning, she now explained, was that her German, neglected so long, grew smaller and smaller, whilst, most inconveniently, her reputation for knowing German grew larger and larger. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wilson might have said that.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“The Lager is doing you immensely much good.”</p>
			<p>Speech did something to things; set them in a mould that was apt to come up again; repeated, it would be dead; but perhaps one need never repeat oneself? To say the same things to different people would give them a sort of fresh life; but there would be death in oneself as one spoke. Perhaps the same thing could be said over and over again, with other things with it, so that it had a different shape, sang a different song and laughed all round itself in amongst different things.</p>
			<p>Intoxication⁠ ⁠… a permanent intoxication in and out amongst life, all the time with an increasing store of good ideas about things; in time, about everything. A slight intoxication began it, making it possible to look at things from a distance, in separate wholes and make discoveries about them. It was being somewhere else, and suddenly looking up, out of completion, at distant things, that brought their meanings and the right words.</p>
			<p>“But you must at once finish. They are closing. It is now midnight.”</p>
			<p>It did not matter. Nothing was at an end. Nothing would ever come to an end again.⁠ ⁠… She passed, talking emphatically, out into the wide dimly-lit sky-filled east-end street, and walked unconscious of fatigue, carrying <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Shatov along at his swiftest plunge, mile after mile, in a straight line westward along the opening avenue of her new permanent freedom from occasions. From detail to detail, snatched swiftly by the slenderest thread of coherence, she passed in easy emphatic talk, covering the bright endless prospect of her contemplation, her voice alive, thrilling with joyful gratitude, quivering now and again as it moved, possessed and controlled by the first faint dawning apprehension of some universal password, from one bright tumultuously branching thing to another, with a gratitude that poured itself out within her in a rain of tears. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Shatov followed her swift migrations with solid responsive animation; he seemed for the first time to find no single thing to object to or correct; even restatement was absent, and presently he began to sing.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“It is a Russian song with words of Poushkin and music of Rubinstein. Ah but it requires Chaliapin. A most profound bass. There is nothing in singing so profoundly moving as pure basso; you should hear him. He stands <em>alone</em> in Europe.”</p>
			<p>The thronging golden multitudes moved to the tones of this great Russian voice, the deepest in the world, singing out across Europe from beyond Germany. With faltering steps, just begun, whilst now and forever she passionately brooded on distant things, she was one of this elect shining army⁠ ⁠… “wandering amongst the mountains, the highest notes if they leap up pure and free, in soprano, touch the sky.”</p>
			<p>“That is true. But in concerts, the strength and most profound moving quality come from the bass. Ah you should hear a Russian male choir. There is not in Europe such strength and flexibility and most particularly such marvel of unanimity, making one single movement of phrase in all these many voices together. There is singing in the great Russian churches, all colourful and with a splendour of ornate decoration, singing that the most infidel could not hear unmoved.”</p>
			<p>The Russian <em>voice</em> was melancholy poetry in itself; somewhere within the shapely rough strength of the words, was a pleading tender melancholy.</p>
			<p>The Bloomsbury Squares were changed. It was like seeing them for the first time; before they had taken hold; and for the last time, for their spell was turning into memory. Already they were clearly seen backgrounds of which in the cold winter moonlight she could, as her feet, set in a pathway that spread throughout the world, swiftly measured them, coolly observe the varying proportions and character. Offence was removed from the tones of visitors who had in the past, in her dumb outraged presence, taken lightly upon their lips the sacred names. Within them the echo of her song mingled with the silent echoes of the footfalls and voices of these enchanted busy passengers.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
